This Software/Hardware product contains the algorithm IDEA(TM) as
described and claimed in US Patent No. 5,214,703, EPO Patent
No. 0482154 and filed Japanese Patent Application No. 508119/1991
"Device for the conversion of a digital block and use of same"
(hereinafter referred to as "Algorithm"). Any use of the Algorithm for
Commercial Purposes is thus subject to a license from Ascom Systec
Ltd. of CH-5506 Mägenwil (Switzerland), being the patentee and sole
owner of all rights, including the term IDEA(TM). Commercial Purposes
shall mean any revenue generating purpose including but not limited to

i) using the Algorithm for company internal purposes (subject to a
Site License).

ii) incorporating an application software containing the Algorithm
into any hardware and/or software and distributing such hardware
and/or software and/or providing services related thereto to others
(subject to a Product License).

iii) using a product containing an application software that uses the
Algorithm (subject to an End-User License), except in case where such
End-User has acquired an implied license by purchasing the said
product from an authorized licensee or where the End-User has already
signed up for a Site License.
All such commercial license agreements are available exclusively from
Ascom Systec Ltd. and may be requested via the Internet World Wide Web
at http://www.ascom.ch/systec/infosec.html or by sending an electronic
mail to IDEA@ascom.ch. Any misuse will be prosecuted.

Use other than for Commercial Purposes is strictly limited to data
transfer between private individuals and not serving Commercial
Purposes. The use by government agencies, non-profit organizations
etc. is considered as use for Commercial Purposes but may be subject
to special conditions. Requests for waivers for non-commercial use
(e.g. by software developers) are welcome.
